our culture's are in jeopardy right now
if we lose our elders they carry a lot
of the knowledge and the ceremonies that
we the young people are still learning
that's what protecting the sacred is is
protecting the elders who are very
vulnerable to this virus the nation's
largest Native American reservation is
being hit hard by Kovan 19 after New
York and New Jersey Navajo Nation has
the highest infection rate in the u.s.
tribal nations and the Native American
community have gone through tremendous
trauma throughout history as it is we
only make up nearly 2 percent of the
population because of what has happened
to us historically Navajo tribe member
Ali Jung is worried about how the virus
puts tribal members at risk along with
what that means for Native American
culture and traditions we want to
protect what we have left and our elders
are so crucial to that to keeping our
culture and language alive our elders
still have so much to offer so much to
teach us in terms of culture in medicine
ways so she launched to protect the
secret a social media campaign to
educate and empower Navajo youth to
protect what secret for them a lot of
our elders don't even speak English so
they don't quite understand what's being
said on the news and so we launched
protect the sacred and I launched it
with a some friends of mine one of those
friends is Mark Ruffalo who is I always
call him one of Indian country's
greatest allies and Paul Rudd joined in
as well and taiko Itt and watching that
tick tock video it's so moving to see
how well and alive your native culture
is and how you've kept it alive in this
modern world it's our call to the youth
to step up as heroes in this moment and
lead that charge to staying home keeping
families home amplifying the messaging
and sharing it with our tribal nations
across the country
Navajo Nation is disproportionately
affected by the virus due to high rates
of heart disease diabetes and obesity an
experts say that lack of access to basic
necessities like food and clean water
pose real threats for the region it's
really hard to stock up on food for
example if you don't have a refrigerator
it's hard to keep essential medicines
cold if you need to and it's really hard
to follow CDC's recommendations of
washing your hands if access to water is
is a challenge and that water is
supposed to be used for drinking for
cooking or livestock according to the
Navajo Nation Department of Water
Resources about 30% of the 175,000
residents living in the Navajo
Reservation don't have access to clean
drinking water it absolutely makes it a
real challenge and probably you in a
unique way compared to the rest of the
states as of April 27th the Navajo
Department of Health has reported 1769
positive kovin 19 cases and 59 total
deaths we're really hopeful that the
Navajo Nation perfu and the stay at home
orders are really going to be helpful to
stop the spread in the community but at
the same time we're preparing for you
know for the day that we you know our
resources are going to start running low
so now putting my moccasins on and
getting ready for some filming all right
so you just got to Shiprock and we're
gonna start Indian country is being
forgotten that's so important that we're
not left out of this conversation again
we're too often invisible what our
people are going through is needs to be
talked about one of the other reasons
that drives me to take this work on and
to start protect the sacred I started it
also because of my own grandparents my
grandparents are 80 years old and my
grandfather is a medicine man and I'm
still learning my ceremonial
practices from him our ceremonies in our
language and our culture is the
foundation of who we are and those
things are the reason that we're still
here today it's how we've survived
[Music]
hey NBC News viewers thanks for checking
out our YouTube channel subscribe by
clicking on that button down here and
click on any of the videos over here to
watch the latest interviews show
highlights and digital exclusives thanks
for watching